---
title: Getting a scholarship for grad studies in Japan
tags: Japan academia
---

Yesterday, perfectly timed on Christmas day, I received an e-mail confirmation that I had received the JSPS DC1 <del>scholarship</del> fellowship (Note: I much later found out JSPS is a _fellowship_ and not a scholarship! This means I pay taxes on it, and tuition isn't automatically waived as it would be for the MEXT scholarship -__- and the miscommunications continue in the land of the rising sun) for pursuing my PhD in Japan, [this lab](http://www.cmplx.riec.tohoku.ac.jp/). **やった！** I had gone through a lengthy and painstaking application process, finishing the paper application last April, then going through a second 'Interview' screening, and finally 7 months later getting a confirmation that I wouldn't need to worry about doing this again.  
Finding a scholarship turned out to be very difficult, with information in English generally scarce and outdated, so after the frustrating ordeal of the paper application was over, I vowed that if I got it I would document the process, my opinions and suggestions, in the hope that it might help others who find themselves in a similar situation. This is that story.  

I will split this into 3 parts: **Scholarships in Japan: general suggestions** (this post), **[JSPS fellowship: paper application]({% post_url 2015-12-27-JSPS-fellowship-paper-application %})** and **[JSPS fellowship: final interview](2015-12-29-JSPS-fellowship-final-interview)**.

## Scholarships in Japan, an Overview

<!-- Let me first explain that I am very biased, spoiled, and give you my context: I'm from Switzerland and did most of my studies at ETH Zurich. Living standards (and living costs) in Switzerland are really high, and PhD conditions (I do robotics) in Switzerland are really cushy: a regular PhD salary (for engineering at ETH anyway) are around 4'000 USD/month. Right. The main point here is not the amount, but the fact that it's a _salary_. You're considered an employee of the university, and will of course be paid as such, including benefits. All the recurring [free-food gags from PhDComics](http://www.phdcomics.com/comics.php?f=1223) are thought to merely be jokes and not a real situation, and while you don't usually put away savings during your grad studies (Switzerland is expensive), you definitely don't worry about finances either.  
Now, I knew things were different outside of Switzerland, but I honestly did not fully realize how much my country contrasted with the reality of the rest of the world. Having talked to many others (in particular people who aren't from Europe), I am aware that some things that really shocked me (such as, the lack of a salary for grad studies in Japan) might seem trivial for others.   -->

<!-- Before committing to a PhD at Tohoku University, I spent a year as an exchange student in order to see if I really liked the lab, the professor and Japan enough to moving here. I did. After the first half year I confirmed with my prof that I wanted to stay on for a PhD, and from then a barrage of bureaucracy and realizations hit me which I wasn't expecting. At some point I almost gave up and went home. But the main point I will focus on here is the fact that you do not get a salary as a grad student here (in Switzerland and much of Europe, a PhD is considered a job), and scholarships are not immediately available. Indeed, it is generally expected that your parents will continue to support you throughout your grad studies, and if you do get a scholarship, well that's a bonus reserved for a lucky few. Suddenly, there was a rush for me to find a scholarship so that I could actually stay in Japan without selling my organs. -->
<!-- While my professor agreed to partially fund me until I did receive a scholarship (from what I understand, this is also quite lucky), there was a sudden rush for me to find a scholarship -->

### TL;DR
* **Start early.** Most Japanese scholarships start in April, are not flexible, and often you need to apply a full year in advance.
* **Get help from a Japanese friend.** A lot of scholarships will have information only in Japanese, or only scant/outdated information in English
* **TRUST NO-ONE.** I've found that when someone didn't know something, I was often  often told _"No"_ instead of a straight-forward _"I don't know, you'll have to check yourself."_. So check application information and eligibility independently.

### The story
Let's start with the basic situation of doing a PhD in Japan. Unlike Switzerland and much of Europe you do not get a salary as a grad student, and it is expected that most students will be independently financed (by their families). So getting a scholarship is something of a priority if you plan to do a PhD here.  
Your best bet at this point is to get a [MEXT scholarship by Embassy Recommendation](http://www.studyjapan.go.jp/en/toj/toj0302e-30.html) (check your local embassy), which means applying in your home-country well in advance and under many circumstances without meeting your professor and labmates, which I actually recommend against in general and especially in Japan (I might blog about this in another post). There are other scholarships, but in many cases you not know whether or not you will receive it until after you've committed to the PhD, simply due to timing. You have been warned.  

One of the major difficulties has been getting information. Tohoku University has a [website listing scholarships](http://www.eng.tohoku.ac.jp/english/life/scholership.html) as they get announced, however these announcements are often posted with very short notice and are definitely not complete. A major problem is that often this information isn't available in English, the programs seem to change, and the administration was often unwilling to see anything outside the official information they received and posted: on multiple occasions I was told that a scholarship I inquired about did not exist or that I was ineligible to apply for it (including the JSPS scholarship that I actually got). Sadly, I missed a deadline on the [MEXT scholarship by University Recommendation](http://www.studyjapan.go.jp/en/toj/toj0302e-30.html) due to this (the administration only knew about the 'Embassy Recommendation' and 'Domestic Selection', and claimed the documents I was requesting didn't exist, until it was too late). After this I was rather upset, developed trust issues, and independently checked all information. This is really difficult to do on your own if you don't read Japanese quite well, so try to get help. But even then, be cynical and double-check things yourself. I was helped out by a lab member who was applying to the DC2 track of the JSPS scholarship (a 2-year scholarship, for students who have already started their phd), and at first he simply replied that I couldn't apply to the JSPS. Indeed, I couldn't apply to _DC2_ because you had to already have started your PhD... and he completely missed the fact that I could apply to the full 3-year scholarship with the _DC1_ track, which follows the exact same application procedure and was explained on the same web-page.  
This initially almost seemed cruelly intentional but I eventually came to understand that this is simply due to a very different cultural mentality. Just as many staff-members were unable to conceive the notion of taking the initiative to check for information about scholarships and application information which they hadn't been directly given by their higher-ups for redistribution. This is actually not out of laziness or malice, they (I'm just making general statements here, fully aware that these are just generalizations, and not always accurate) really just aren't used to being flexible or taking initiative, and it requires a strenuous amount of mental-bending for them to do it. But this is a topic for another post; the take-home message is, when someone is helping you, take the time and ask them to show you and explain to you everything in detail, even if it is tedious and time-consuming. Don't accept everything at face value, because often it simply won't be the full picture. And it's your responsibility to make sure you understand when it is and when you need to dig a little deeper.

That pretty much sums up my general advice. [JSPS](http://www.jsps.go.jp/english/e-pd/index.html) is actually the only scholarship I applied to (I planned on applying to MEXT but to my consternation I missed the deadline, see above), so most of my advice will focus on that application in the next couple of posts. JSPS does seem to be among the best <del>scholarships</del> fellowships available in Japan, both in terms of financing but also I've come under the impression that JSPS recipients get more "cred" from their peers and professors. It is also somewhat competitive, with 22% acceptance rate this year. Of these, about 17% received the fellowship after the first step, and the rest had to do a final interview, at which point the chances were much higher (I went through this step as well).